We've studied a number of inertial sensors.
The first sensor that we looked at was the
accelerometer and that measures the total
acceleration of a body.
That acceleration might be due to forces acting
on the body or the acceleration might be due
to gravity acting on the body.
If the only force acting on a body is gravity,
then we can use the acceleration measured
on the body to determine the roll and pitch
angles with respect to the gravity vector
or the downward direction.
We looked at gyroscopes which are able to
measure components of the angular velocity
of the body.
And, we looked at magnetometers which can
sense components of the Earth’s magnetic
field with respect to the coordinate frame
attached to the body of the object.
We can combine information from accelerometers
and magnetometers to determine the orientation
of the body with respect to magnetic north.
The earliest types of inertial navigation
systems were referred to as gimballed and
they are very large instruments that I showed
very early on in this lecture.
It contains a free floating gyro-stabilized
platform referred to as the stable element
and it’s shown here by the coordinate frame
I.
That platform is connected to the vehicle
by a gimbal mechanism.
As the orientation of the vehicle changes,
the body frame which is attached to the vehicle
changes, but the inertial coordinate frame
I remains fixed in space.
We can, therefore, determine the orientation
of a vehicle by measuring the angles of the
gimbals between the inertial frame which is
fixed in space and the body frame which is
attached to the vehicle.
The accelerometers are mounted on the gyro-
stabilized platform, so they measure acceleration
of the vehicle in the inertial frame.
But if we want to, and we know the orientation
of the vehicle with respect to the inertial
frame, we can rotate the acceleration vector
in to the vehicles body frame.
This is a schematic of the gimballed inertial
measurement unit used on the Apollo spacecraft.
The stable element is shown here and it contains
three spinning gyroscopes and they maintain
the orientation of that platform constant
with respect to the stars.
That platform also contains three accelerometers
indicated here, XA, YA and ZA.
The gimbal mechanism effectively allows the
spacecraft to rotate about the stable platform
and the gimbal angles are measured by rather
old fashioned sensors by today’s standard
called resolvers.
Today, almost all inertial measurement units
use what’s called the strap-down configuration.
We have a body frame B attached to the vehicle
and the accelerometers and gyroscopes measure
acceleration along each of the body frame
axis and the gyroscopes measure the angular
velocity components about each of the body
frame coordinate axes.
As the vehicle orientation changes, so does
the body frame B, we measure the angular velocity
in the coordinate frame B and we integrate
that over time to determine the orientation
of the vehicle.
Once we know the orientation of the vehicle
in the body frame, we can rotate it back to
the inertial frame to determine our acceleration
with respect to the stars.